
                  Assorted Scheme scripts
                  -----------------------

Currently, the primary focus of work in this directory is to update
a database of statistics based on running word-sense disambiguation
together with parse results. This is implemented in stats-collection.scm.

The actual SQL tables are defined and created by a different project 
(sorry!), the 'lexical attraction' package on launchpad.  See, in
particular, src/sql/disjunct.sql from that package.

OpenCog scripts
---------------
The following scripts are meant to run within the OpenCog scheme
interpreter (as they manipulate OpenCog atoms directly). They can be
loaded with the "load-nlp.sh" shell script.

 * nlp-utils: Some mini nlp-related utilities, mostly for pointer 
   chasing nlp-specific structures.

 * stats-collection.scm: Look for documents for which word-sense
   disambiguation has been performed; use these to update a database
   of statistics that associates link-grammar parses with wsd results.

 * parse-rank.scm: Tweak link-grammar parse-ranking scores, based
   on the mutual information contained in word pairs. (Not currently
   used)

 * disjunct.scm: Build lists of link-grammar disjuncts.

 * wsd-process.scm: top-level script for driving WSD processing. 
   It takes input files, loads them into opencog, performs the WSD,
   stores the accumulated statistics, and then moves each input file
   out of the way, to denote that its done with that file.  Explicit
   paths to data files need to be provided.

Stand-alone scripts
-------------------
The following scripts are meant to be run stand-alone, as they do not
access any OpenCog atoms directly.  That is, thhey can run within the 
ordinary guile interpreter.

 * compute-mi.scm: Compute the conditional probability and mutual
   information for assorted link-grammar disjunct tables. This assumes
   that the tables have already been populated with raw data, and thus,
   the raw count fields have meaningful (and final) values. This 
   script merely totals up the counts, and computes the various
   probabilities.

 * cluster.scm: Cheapo data clustering algo.
