
                  WSD Statistics collection
                  -------------------------

The primary focus of work in this directory is to update a database of 
statistics based on running word-sense disambiguation together with 
parse results. This is implemented in stats-collection.scm.

The actual SQL tables are defined and created by a different project 
(sorry!), the 'lexical attraction' package on launchpad.  See, in
particular, src/sql/disjunct.sql from that package.

HowTo
-----
Steps to run WSD:  (See also detailed instuctions in main NLP readme)
0) Parse text, create CFF files. Modify A.scm to specify the location
   of these files.
1) create the database "lexat". If using a different name, edit 
   stats-collection.scm to suit.
2) create the tables by running src/sql/disjunct.sql from the 
   lexat package.
3) Start opencog: opencog/cogserver/server/cogserver -c ../lib/opencog-wsd.conf
4) telnet localhost 17001 
5) sql-load, sql-close to load up word-sense hypergraphs
6) go to the scheme shell.
7) issue scheme command (do-wsd 1)  this will process 1 file.


Processing files
----------------
The following scripts are meant to run within the OpenCog scheme
interpreter (as they manipulate OpenCog atoms directly). They should
be manually loaded with the "load-wsd.sh" shell script.

 * stats-collection.scm: Look for documents for which word-sense
   disambiguation has been performed; use these to update a database
   of statistics that associates link-grammar parses with wsd results.

 * wsd-process.scm: top-level script for driving WSD processing. 
   It takes input files, loads them into opencog, performs the WSD,
   stores the accumulated statistics, and then moves each input file
   out of the way, to denote that its done with that file.  Explicit
   paths to data files need to be provided.

 * A.scm, E.scm: path to parsed data.

 * disjunct-list.scm: Build lists of link-grammar disjuncts. A link-
   grammar disjunct is a list of connectors that are used to connect
   a word to the other words in a sentence. (XXX this file is obsolete,
   superceded by changes in the RelEx output format).
